32
2 . Chemistry of Life
calcium, with atomic number 20) can hold eight electrons, this is referred to as the octet rule. An element can
donate, accept, or share electrons with other elements to fill its outer shell and satisfy the octet rule.
When an atom does not contain equal numbers of protons and electrons, it is called an ion. Because the number of
electrons does not equal the number of protons, each ion has a net charge. Positive ions are formed by losing
electrons and are called cations. Negative ions are formed by gaining electrons and are called anions.
For example, sodium only has one electron in its outermost shell. It takes less energy for sodium to donate that one
electron than it does to accept seven more electrons to fill the outer shell. If sodium loses an electron, it now has 11
protons and only 10 electrons, leaving it with an overall charge of +1. It is now called a sodium ion.
The chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer shell. Again, it is more energy-efficient for chlorine to gain one
electron than to lose seven. Therefore, it tends to gain an electron to create an ion with 17 protons and 18 electrons,
giving it a net negative (-1) charge. It is now called a chloride ion. This movement of electrons from one element to
another is referred to as electron transfer. As Figure 2.5 illustrates, a sodium atom (Na) only has one electron in its
outermost shell, whereas a chlorine atom (CI) has seven electrons in its outermost shell. A sodium atom will donate
its one electron to empty its shell, and a chlorine atom will accept that electron to fill its shell, becoming chloride.
Both ions now satisfy the octet rule and have complete outermost shells. Because the number of electrons is no
longer equal to the number of protons, each is now an ion and has a +1 (sodium) or -1 (chloride) charge.
Na
CI
Na
CI
FIGURE 2.5 Elements tend to fill their outermost shells with electrons. To do this, they can either donate or accept electrons from other
elements.
lonic Bonds
There are four types of bonds or interactions: ionic, covalent, hydrogen bonds, and van der Waals interactions. Ionic
and covalent bonds are strong interactions that require a larger energy input to break apart. When an element
donates an electron from its outer shell, as in the sodium atom example above, a positive ion is formed. The
element accepting the electron is now negatively charged. Because positive and negative charges attract, these ions
stay together and form an ionic bond, or a bond between ions. The elements bond together with the electron from
one element staying predominantly with the other element. When Na+ and Cl ions combine to produce NaCl, an
electron from a sodium atom stays with the other seven from the chlorine atom, and the sodium and chloride ions
attract each other in a lattice of ions with a net zero charge.
Covalent Bonds
Another type of strong chemical bond between two or more atoms is a covalent bond. These bonds form when an
electron is shared between two elements and are the strongest and most common form of chemical bond in living
organisms. Covalent bonds form between the elements that make up the biological molecules in our cells. Unlike
Access for free at openstax.org
