2.1 The Building Blocks of Molecules
31
FIGURE 2.4 The age of remains that contain carbon and are less than about 50,000 years old, such as this pygmy mammoth, can be
determined using carbon dating. (credit: Bill Faulkner/NPS)
LINK TO LEARNING
To learn more about atoms and isotopes, and how you can tell one isotope from another, visit this site
(http://openstax.org/l/isotopes) and run the simulation.
Chemical Bonds
How elements interact with one another depends on how their electrons are arranged and how many openings for
electrons exist at the outermost region where electrons are present in an atom. Electrons exist at energy levels that
form shells around the nucleus. The closest shell can hold up to two electrons. The closest shell to the nucleus is
always filled first, before any other shell can be filled. Hydrogen has one electron; therefore, it has only one spot
occupied within the lowest shell. Helium has two electrons; therefore, it can completely fill the lowest shell with its
two electrons. If you look at the periodic table, you will see that hydrogen and helium are the only two elements in
the first row. This is because they only have electrons in their first shell. Hydrogen and helium are the only two
elements that have the lowest shell and no other shells.
The second and third energy levels can hold up to eight electrons. The eight electrons are arranged in four pairs and
one position in each pair is filled with an electron before any pairs are completed.
Looking at the periodic table again (Figure 2.3), you will notice that there are seven rows. These rows correspond to
the number of shells that the elements within that row have. The elements within a particular row have increasing
numbers of electrons as the columns proceed from left to right. Although each element has the same number of
shells, not all of the shells are completely filled with electrons. If you look at the second row of the periodic table,
you will find lithium (Li), beryllium (Be), boron (B), carbon (C), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), fluorine (F), and neon (Ne).
These all have electrons that occupy only the first and second shells. Lithium has only one electron in its outermost
shell, beryllium has two electrons, boron has three, and so on, until the entire shell is filled with eight electrons, as is
the case with neon.
Not all elements have enough electrons to fill their outermost shells, but an atom is at its most stable when all of the
electron positions in the outermost shell are filled. Because of these vacancies in the outermost shells, we see the
formation of chemical bonds, or interactions between two or more of the same or different elements that result in
the formation of molecules. To achieve greater stability, atoms will tend to completely fill their outer shells and will
bond with other elements to accomplish this goal by sharing electrons, accepting electrons from another atom, or
donating electrons to another atom. Because the outermost shells of the elements with low atomic numbers (up to
