34
2 . Chemistry of Life
water would be a gas rather than a liquid at room temperature.
o
Covalent bond
o
H
H
H
H
Hydrogen bond
H
H
FIGURE 2.7 Hydrogen bonds form between slightly positive (o+) and slightly negative (5-) charges of polar covalent molecules, such as
water.
Hydrogen bonds can form between different molecules and they do not always have to include a water molecule.
Hydrogen atoms in polar bonds within any molecule can form bonds with other adjacent molecules. For example,
hydrogen bonds hold together two long strands of DNA to give the DNA molecule its characteristic double-stranded
structure. Hydrogen bonds are also responsible for some of the three-dimensional structure of proteins.
van der Waals Interactions
Like hydrogen bonds, van der Waals interactions are weak attractions or interactions between molecules. They
occur between polar, covalently bound, atoms in different molecules. Some of these weak attractions are caused by
temporary partial charges formed when electrons move around a nucleus. These weak interactions between
molecules are important in biological systems.
III
CAREER CONNECTION
Radiography Technician
Have you or anyone you know ever had a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, a mammogram, or an X-ray?
These tests produce images of your soft tissues and organs (as with an MRI or mammogram) or your bones (as
happens in an X-ray) by using either radiowaves or special isotopes (radiolabeled or fluorescently labeled) that are
ingested or injected into the body. These tests provide data for disease diagnoses by creating images of your organs
or skeletal system.
MRI imaging works by subjecting hydrogen nuclei, which are abundant in the water in soft tissues, to fluctuating
magnetic fields, which cause them to emit their own magnetic field. This signal is then read by sensors in the
machine and interpreted by a computer to form a detailed image.
Some radiography technologists and technicians specialize in computed tomography, MRI, and mammography. They
produce films or images of the body that help medical professionals examine and diagnose. Radiologists work
directly with patients, explaining machinery, preparing them for exams, and ensuring that their body or body parts
are positioned correctly to produce the needed images. Physicians or radiologists then analyze the test results.
Radiography technicians can work in hospitals, doctors' offices, or specialized imaging centers. Training to become a
radiography technician happens at hospitals, colleges, and universities that offer certificates, associate's degrees, or
bachelor's degrees in radiography.
2.2 Water
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe the properties of water that are critical to maintaining life
Do you ever wonder why scientists spend time looking for water on other planets? It is because water is essential to
life; even minute traces of it on another planet can indicate that life could or did exist on that planet. Water is one of
Access for free at openstax.org
