2.1 The Building Blocks of Molecules
33
ionic bonds, covalent bonds do not dissociate in water.
The hydrogen and oxygen atoms that combine to form water molecules are bound together by covalent bonds. The
electron from the hydrogen atom divides its time between the outer shell of the hydrogen atom and the incomplete
outer shell of the oxygen atom. To completely fill the outer shell of an oxygen atom, two electrons from two
hydrogen atoms are needed, hence the subscript "2" in H20. The electrons are shared between the atoms, dividing
their time between them to "fill" the outer shell of each. This sharing is a lower energy state for all of the atoms
involved than if they existed without their outer shells filled.
There are two types of covalent bonds: polar and nonpolar. Nonpolar covalent bonds form between two atoms of
the same element or between different elements that share the electrons equally. For example, an oxygen atom can
bond with another oxygen atom to fill their outer shells. This association is nonpolar because the electrons will be
equally distributed between each oxygen atom. Two covalent bonds form between the two oxygen atoms because
oxygen requires two shared electrons to fill its outermost shell. Nitrogen atoms will form three covalent bonds (also
called triple covalent) between two atoms of nitrogen because each nitrogen atom needs three electrons to fill its
outermost shell. Another example of a nonpolar covalent bond is found in the methane (CH4) molecule. The carbon
atom has four electrons in its outermost shell and needs four more to fill it. It gets these four from four hydrogen
atoms, each atom providing one. These elements all share the electrons equally, creating four nonpolar covalent
bonds (Figure 2.6).
In a polar covalent bond, the electrons shared by the atoms spend more time closer to one nucleus than to the
other nucleus. Because of the unequal distribution of electrons between the different nuclei, a slightly positive (5+)
or slightly negative (5-) charge develops. The covalent bonds between hydrogen and oxygen atoms in water are
polar covalent bonds. The shared electrons spend more time near the oxygen nucleus, giving it a small negative
charge, than they spend near the hydrogen nuclei, giving these molecules a small positive charge.
Polar covalent bond
Nonpolar covalent bond
Nonpolar covalent double bond
8+
8+
H
H
H
o
o
H
C
H
&-
H
Single bond
Double bond
FIGURE 2.6 The water molecule (left) depicts a polar bond with a slightly positive charge on the hydrogen atoms and a slightly negative
charge on the oxygen. Examples of nonpolar bonds include methane (middle) and oxygen (right).
Hydrogen Bonds
Ionic and covalent bonds are strong bonds that require considerable energy to break. However, not all bonds
between elements are ionic or covalent bonds. Weaker bonds can also form. These are attractions that occur
between positive and negative charges that do not require much energy to break. Two weak bonds that occur
frequently are hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions. These bonds give rise to the unique properties of
water and the unique structures of DNA and proteins.
When polar covalent bonds containing a hydrogen atom form, the hydrogen atom in that bond has a slightly positive
charge. This is because the shared electron is pulled more strongly toward the other element and away from the
hydrogen nucleus. Because the hydrogen atom is slightly positive (+), it will be attracted to neighboring negative
partial charges (5-). When this happens, a weak interaction occurs between the + charge of the hydrogen atom of
one molecule and the charge of the other molecule. This interaction is called a hydrogen bond. This type of bond
is common; for example, the liquid nature of water is caused by the hydrogen bonds between water molecules
(Figure 2.7). Hydrogen bonds give water the unique properties that sustain life. If it were not for hydrogen bonding,
