28
2 e Chemistry of Life
2.1 The Building Blocks of Molecules
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Describe matter and elements
Describe the interrelationship between protons, neutrons, and electrons, and the ways in
which electrons can be donated or shared between atoms
At its most fundamental level, life is made up of matter. Matter occupies space and has mass. All
matter is composed of elements, substances that cannot be broken down or transformed
chemically into other substances. Each element is made of atoms, each with a constant number of
protons and unique properties. A total of 118 elements have been defined; however, only 92 occur
naturally, and fewer than 30 are found in living cells. The remaining 26 elements are unstable and,
therefore, do not exist for very long or are theoretical and have yet to be detected.
Each element is designated by its chemical symbol (such as H, N, O, C, and Na), and possesses
unique properties. These unique properties allow elements to combine and to bond with each
other in specific ways.
Atoms
An atom is the smallest component of an element that retains all of the chemical properties of
that element. For example, one hydrogen atom has all of the properties of the element hydrogen,
such as it exists as a gas at room temperature, and it bonds with oxygen to create a water
molecule. Hydrogen atoms cannot be broken down into anything smaller while still retaining the
properties of hydrogen. If a hydrogen atom were broken down into subatomic particles, it would
no longer have the properties of hydrogen.
At the most basic level, all organisms are made of a combination of elements. They contain atoms
that combine together to form molecules. In multicellular organisms, such as animals, molecules
can interact to form cells that combine to form tissues, which make up organs. These
combinations continue until entire multicellular organisms are formed.
All atoms contain protons, electrons, and neutrons (Figure 2.2). The most common isotope of
hydrogen (H) is the only exception and is made of one proton and one electron with no neutrons. A
proton is a positively charged particle that resides in the nucleus (the core of the atom) of an atom
and has a mass of 1 and a charge of +1. An electron is a negatively charged particle that travels in
the space around the nucleus. In other words, it resides outside of the nucleus. It has a negligible
mass and has a charge of -1.
Neutrons
Electrons
Nucleus
+
Protons
FIGURE 2.2 Atoms are made up of protons and neutrons located within the nucleus, and electrons surrounding the
nucleus.
Neutrons, like protons, reside in the nucleus of an atom. They have a mass of 1 and no charge.
The positive (protons) and negative (electrons) charges balance each other in a neutral atom,
which has a net zero charge.
Access for free at openstax.org
