2.1 The Building Blocks of Molecules
29
Because protons and neutrons each have a mass of 1, the mass of an atom is equal to the number of protons and
neutrons of that atom. The number of electrons does not factor into the overall mass, because their mass is so
small.
As stated earlier, each element has its own unique properties. Each contains a different number of protons and
neutrons, giving it its own atomic number and mass number. The atomic number of an element is equal to the
number of protons that element contains. The mass number, or atomic mass, is the number of protons plus the
number of neutrons of that element. Therefore, it is possible to determine the number of neutrons by subtracting
the atomic number from the mass number.
These numbers provide information about the elements and how they will react when combined. Different elements
have different melting and boiling points, and are in different states (liquid, solid, or gas) at room temperature. They
also combine in different ways. Some form specific types of bonds, whereas others do not. How they combine is
based on the number of electrons present. Because of these characteristics, the elements are arranged into the
periodic table of elements, a chart of the elements that includes the atomic number and relative atomic mass of
each element. The periodic table also provides key information about the properties of elements (Figure 2.2)-often
indicated by color-coding. The arrangement of the table also shows how the electrons in each element are
organized and provides important details about how atoms will react with each other to form molecules.
Isotopes are different forms of the same element that have the same number of protons, but a different number of
neutrons. Some elements, such as carbon, potassium, and uranium, have naturally occurring isotopes. Carbon-12,
the most common isotope of carbon, contains six protons and six neutrons. Therefore, it has a mass number of 12
(six protons and six neutrons) and an atomic number of 6 (which makes it carbon). Carbon-14 contains six protons
and eight neutrons. Therefore, it has a mass number of 14 (six protons and eight neutrons) and an atomic number of
6, meaning it is still the element carbon. These two alternate forms of carbon are isotopes. Some isotopes are
unstable and will lose protons, other subatomic particles, or energy to form more stable elements. These are called
radioactive isotopes or radioisotopes.
