11. Teacher-made assessment strategies
mathematics knowledge and skills she taught during the previous weeks. The tests varied little format and students
always did them individually with pencil and paper. Many teachers, including mathematics teachers, now use a
wide variety of methods to determine what their students have learned and also use this assessment information to
modify their instruction. In this chapter the focus is on using classroom assessments to improve student learning
and we begin with some basic concepts.
Basic concepts
Assessment is an integrated process of gaining information about students' learning and making value
judgments about their progress (Linn & Miller, 2005). Information about students' progress can be obtained from
a variety of sources including projects, portfolios, performances, observations, and tests. The information about
students' learning is often assigned specific numbers or grades and this involves measurement. Measurement
answers the question, "How much?" and is used most commonly when the teacher scores a test or product and
assigns numbers (e.g. 28 /30 on the biology test; 90/100 on the science project). Evaluation is the process of
making judgments about the assessment information (Airasian, 2005). These judgments may be about individual
students (e.g. should Jacob's course grade take into account his significant improvement over the grading period?),
the assessment method used (e.g. is the multiple choice test a useful way to obtain information about problem
solving), or one's own teaching (e.g. most of the students this year did much better on the essay assignment than
last year SO my new teaching methods seem effective).
The primary focus in this chapter is on assessment for learning, where the priority is designing and using
assessment strategies to enhance student learning and development. Assessment for learning is often formative
assessment, i.e. it takes place during the course of instruction by providing information that teachers can use to
revise their teaching and students can use to improve their learning (Black, Harrison, Lee, Marshall & Wiliam,
2004). Formative assessment includes both informal assessment involving spontaneous unsystematic
observations of students' behaviors (e.g. during a question and answer session or while the students are working on
an assignment) and formal assessment involving pre-planned, systematic gathering of data. Assessment of
learning is formal assessment that involves assessing students in order to certify their competence and fulfill
accountability mandates and is the primary focus of the next chapter on standardized tests but is also considered in
this chapter. Assessment of learning is typically summative, that is, administered after the instruction is
completed (e.g. a final examination in an educational psychology course). Summative assessments provide
information about how well students mastered the material, whether students are ready for the next unit, and what
grades should be given (Airasian, 2005).
Assessment for learning: an overview of the process
Using assessment to advance students' learning not just check on learning requires viewing assessment as a
process that is integral to the all phases of teaching including planning, classroom interactions and instruction,
communication with parents, and self-reflection (Stiggins, 2002). Essential steps in assessment for learning
include:
Step 1: Having clear instructional goals and communicating them to students
In the previous chapter we documented the importance of teachers thinking carefully about the purposes of each
lesson and unit. This may be hard for beginning teachers. For example, Vanessa, a middle school social studies
241
